3D MRI brain tumor segmentation using autoencoder regularization

Abstract
	Automated segmentation of brain tumors from 3D magnetic resonance images (MRIs) is necessary for the diagnosis, monitoring, and treatment planning of the disease. Manual delineation practices require anatomical knowledge, are expensive, time consuming and can be inaccurate due to human error. Here, we describe a semantic segmentation network for tumor subregion segmentation from 3D MRIs based on encoder-decoder architecture. Due to a limited training dataset size, a variational auto-encoder branch is added to reconstruct the input image itself in order to regularize the shared decoder and impose additional constraints on its layers. The current approach won 1st place in the BraTS 2018 challenge.

Introduction
	Brain tumors are categorized into primary and secondary tumor types. Primary brain tumors originate from brain cells, whereas secondary tumors metastasize into the brain from other organs. The most common type of primary brain tumors are gliomas, which arise from brain glial cells. Gliomas can be of low-grade (LGG) and high-grade (HGG) subtypes. High grade gliomas are an aggressive type of malignant brain tumor that grow rapidly, usually require surgery and radiotherapy and have poor survival prognosis. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a key diagnostic tool for brain tumor analysis, monitoring and surgery planning. Usually, several complimentary 3D MRI modalities are acquired - such as T1, T1 with contrast agent (T1c), T2 and Fluid Attenuation Inversion Recover (FLAIR) - to emphasize different tissue properties and areas of tumor spread. For example the contrast agent, usually gadolinium, emphasizes hyperactive tumor subregions in T1c MRI modality.

	Automated segmentation of 3D brain tumors can save physicians time and provide an accurate reproducible solution for further tumor analysis and monitoring. Recently, deep learning based segmentation techniques surpassed traditional computer vision methods for dense semantic segmentation. Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are able to learn from examples and demonstrate state-of-the-art segmentation accuracy both in 2D natural images [6] and in 3D medical image modalities [19].