Player behavior and personality modeling for interactive storytelling in games

Abstract
Current video games use simple methods to deal with interactive narratives and the enormous variety of player types. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to interactive storytelling in games, in which the quests and the ongoing story are determined in view of individual personality traits and behavioral attitudes in a non-deterministic way. Our method starts the process employing a new technique to assess the player’s personality traits according to the well-known Big Five model. These traits are then used by a nondeterministic planning algorithm to define adaptive goal hierarchies. In addition, an artificial neural network is trained to predict player behaviors in real-time, allowing partial-order planning operators to use player behaviors and personality traits as logical terms in their preconditions. With this approach, a richer individualized experience is provided to the player, while preserving consistency with the conventions of the chosen genre.
	
Introduction
	Video games add new dimensions to traditional storytelling by allowing players to change narratives through their own actions. In modern Role-Playing Games (RPGs), this is usually done by adopting branching storylines based on key choices presented to players at certain points of the game. Some RPGs, such as Mass Effect 2 (BioWare, 2010), Dragon Age: Inquisition (BioWare, 2014), and The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt (CD Projekt RED, 2015), perform this so well that they provide the player with a real sense of control over the story. However, such branching points are usually presented through specific dialog choices or predetermined actions (e.g. killing or forgiving an enemy, collecting or not collecting a specific item), which reduces the player’s sense of agency (i.e. the impression of controlling his/her own actions). 
	Currently, both game industry and game consumers have great interest in new forms of interactive storytelling that may provide games with truly interactive stories, in which all in-game player’s actions and preferences can affect the development of the narrative. However, understanding player preferences and interpreting in-game behaviors in real-time is not an easy task. This problem involves an active topic of research on artificial intelligence, known as player modeling. Player modeling is the study and use of artificial and computational intelligence techniques [1] for the construction of computational models of players, which includes cognitive, affective and behavioral characteristics. In general, a player model is an abstract description of the player’s characteristics in the real world or in the game environment [2]. Indeed, the construction of effective player models involves a multidisciplinary intersection of the fields of affective computing, experimental psychology, human-computer interaction, big data, and analytics, which are part of the so called “game analytics”