Brain tumor segmentation with Deep Neural Networks

Abstract
	In this paper, we present a fully automatic brain tumor segmentation method based on Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). The proposed networks are tailored to glioblastomas (both low and high grade) pictured in MR images. By their very nature, these tumors can appear anywhere in the brain and have almost any kind of shape, size, and contrast. These reasons motivate our exploration of a machine learning solution that exploits a flexible, high capacity DNN while being extremely efficient. Here, we give a description of different model choices that we've found to be necessary for obtaining competitive performance. We explore in particular different architectures based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), i.e. DNNs specifically adapted to image data. We present a novel CNN architecture which differs from those traditionally used in computer vision. Our CNN exploits both local features as well as more global contextual features simultaneously. Also, different from most traditional uses of CNNs, our networks use a final layer that is a convolutional implementation of a fully connected layer which allows a 40 fold speed up. We also describe a 2-phase training procedure that allows us to tackle difficulties related to the imbalance of tumor labels. Finally, we explore a cascade architecture in which the output of a basic CNN is treated as an additional source of information for a subsequent CNN. Results reported on the 2013 BRATS test dataset reveal that our architecture improves over the currently published state-of-the-art while being over 30 times faster.

Introduction
	In the United States alone, it is estimated that 23,000 new cases of brain cancer will be diagnosed in 2015.1 While gliomas are the most common brain tumors, they can be less aggressive (i.e. low grade) in a patient with a life expectancy of several years, or more aggressive (i.e. high grade) in a patient with a life expectancy of at most 2 years. Although surgery is the most common treatment for brain tumors, radiation and chemotherapy may be used to slow the growth of tumors that cannot be physically removed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides detailed images of the brain, and is one of the most common tests used to diagnose brain tumors. All the more, brain tumor segmentation from MR images can have great impact for improved diagnostics, growth rate prediction and treatment planning.
	While some tumors such as meningiomas can be easily segmented, others like gliomas and glioblastomas are much more difficult to localize. These tumors (together with their surrounding edema) are often diffused, poorly contrasted, and extend tentaclelike structures that make them difficult to segment. Another fundamental difficulty with segmenting brain tumors is that they can appear anywhere in the brain, in almost any shape and size. Furthermore, unlike images derived from X-ray computed tomography (CT) scans, the scale of voxel values in MR images is not standardized. Depending on the type of MR machine used (1.5, 3 or 7 tesla) and the acquisition protocol (field of view value, voxel resolution, gradient strength, b0 value, etc.), the same tumorous cells may end up having drastically different gray-scale values when pictured in different hospitals.